[gldfs.cr.usgs.gov]

USGS Central Region Geologic Hazards Team Finger Server.

----
Login name: qk_info   			In real life: see Ray Buland
Never logged in.
Mail last read Wed Jan  6 12:20:01 1999
Plan:
                                  Finger Quake
                               General Information

   The list of recent earthquakes available through "finger quake@gldfs..." is 
a service provided by the National Earthquake Information Service (NEIS) of the 
U. S. Geological Survey.  The NEIS is located at the National Earthquake 
Information Center (NEIC) in Golden, Colorado, USA which also serves as World 
Data Center A for Seismology.  The NEIS is a member of the Council of the 
National Seismic System (CNSS) which coordinates activities among the national 
and regional seismograph networks, including "finger quake" services.  The NEIS 
is also closely associated with the U. S. National Seismograph Network (USNSN) 
and cooperates with national and international seismological organizations 
around the world.  Unlike other members of the CNSS, the NEIS is responsible 
for reporting on moderate to large earthquakes throughout the U. S. and large 
earthquakes worldwide.

                             Earthquake Parameters

   DATE-TIME is in Coordinated Universal Time (UTC).  This is approximately the 
same as Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) which is 5 hours later than Eastern Standard 
Time (EST) and 8 hour later than Pacific Standard Time (PST).  Geographic 
latitude (LAT) and longitude (LON) are given in decimal degrees corresponding 
to the usual map coordinates.  Depth (DEP) is given in kilometers below sea 
level.  Six different magnitude types (MAG) may be quoted:  Ml (local, the 
original Richter magnitude), Lg (mblg), Md (duration), Mb (body wave), Ms 
(surface wave), and Mw (moment).  Since all magnitude types have been 
calibrated with respect to one another, the differences are generally of 
interest only to seismologists.  Given the size, location, and available 
information, the most meaningful magnitude will be quoted for each event.  
Location qualities (Q) are A (good), B (fair), C (poor), and D (bad).  The 
quality refers to the precision with which the earthquake location has been 
computed.  A and B qualities mean that the location is quite reliable while 
a C quality can be pretty uncertain.  Bad locations will generally not be 
reported.  No quality implies a location held to the coordinates of another 
organization (e.g., a regional network with better coverage of an event).  The 
comment is an automatically generated region name and can be misleading for 
earthquakes near region boundaries.
   Note that all earthquakes on the "quake" list have been reviewed by a 
seismic analyst.  However, in the interest of timeliness, locations and 
magnitudes are entered once and not updated on the list.  Differences between 
parameters quoted here and in the media do not necessarily imply that the 
"quake" list is in error.  Small differences in locations and magnitudes 
determined by different organizations are to be expected due to differences in 
the information available.  Also, in rare instances, substantial differences in 
magnitudes can be due to real differences in interpretation, procedures, and 
conventions.

                             Additional Information

   Recent earthquake lists for specific regions of the U. S. are available from 
other CNSS members using "finger quake" at:  scec.gps.caltech.edu (Southern 
California), andreas.wr.usgs.gov and quake.geo.berkeley.edu (Northern 
California), geophys.washington.edu (Pacific Northwest), giseis.alaska.edu 
(Alaska), seismo.unr.edu (Nevada), eqinfo.seis.utah.edu (Utah), 
sisyphus.idbsu.edu (Idaho), info.seismo.usbr.gov (Wyoming & Western Colorado), 
mbmgsun.mtech.edu (Montana), quake.eas.slu.edu (Central U. S.), 
vtso.geol.vt.edu (Southeast), ldeo.columbia.edu (Northeast), and 
tako.wr.usgs.gov (Hawaii).  A recent Canadian earthquake list is available at:  
quake@seismo.emr.ca (in English) and seisme@seismo.emr.ca (in French).  Note 
that some of the newer finger servers are temporarily redirected to our finger 
list.
   After earthquakes have scrolled off of the "quake" list, they will be 
available in updated form from the Quick Epicenter Determinations (QED) 
bulletin board.  To access the QED, use "telnet neis.cr.usgs.gov", login as 
qed (no password required), and follow the on-line directions.  Note that 
telnet is not like finger.  In particular, you will need to interact with the 
QED to obtain what you want.  The QED includes earthquakes from about the last 
six weeks and may be selectively searched.  After six weeks, the earthquakes 
are revised with more data and the Preliminary Determination of Epicenters 
(PDE) bulletin is published (on paper).  After about four months, the 
earthquakes are revised again with even more data and republished as the PDE 
Monthly Listing.  For information on subscribing to the PDE or obtaining PDE 
information electronically, call (303) 273-8500 during normal business hours 
(Mountain Time Zone).  Selective searches of our historical hypocenter database 
are also available.  For information on this service, send E-mail to Glen 
Reagor at hdf@neis.cr.usgs.gov.
   Much more extensive information derived from the USNSN is also available 
automatically through our AutoDRM (Automatic Data Request Manager).  Although 
this service is intended to provide USNSN waveform data and instrument 
responses for professional seismologists, it can also be used to obtain 
information about earthquakes, activity at individual stations, the network 
configuration, etc.  To get started on the AutoDRM, send E-mail to:  
autodrm@gldfs.cr.usgs.gov with the message text:  PLEASE HELP all on one line.  
Note that using the AutoDRM AMI command provides the same information as the 
"quake" list, but for a longer time period.
   Many other products and services are available from the U. G. Geological 
Survey.  For information on other earthquake related products such as maps and 
CD-ROMs, try accessing the NEIC home page on the World Wide Web at 
http://wwwneic.cr.usgs.gov.

                              Publication Criteria

   The list available through "finger quake@gldfs..." has become the de facto 
near-real-time bulletin of the NEIS.  In order to make the "quake" list more 
internally consistent and better integrated with other NEIC products, 
particularly the Quick Epicenter Determinations (QED) bulletin board, it has 
been desirable to define formal publication criteria for the "quake" list.  
These criteria fall into two response time categories:  immediate (e.g., within 
two hours) and 24 hour response (normal working days only).  Note that the 
"quake" list may not be complete at the indicated thresholds if insufficient 
information is available to either locate the event adequately or to determine 
that it meets the publication criteria.
   On an immediate basis, all Earthquake Early Alerting Service alarm events 
will be made available to the "quake" list.  At a minimum, this will includes 
most earthquakes in the contiguous United States, Hawaii, and the more 
populated areas of Alaska of magnitude 4.5 or greater, most other earthquakes 
in the United States of magnitude 5.5 or greater, and most foreign earthquakes 
of magnitude 6.5 or greater.  In practice, many foreign earthquakes smaller 
than a magnitude of 6.5 will also be provided on an immediate basis.  
Typically, this would include earthquakes in Mexico of magnitude 4.8 or larger, 
earthquakes in northern South America of magnitude 5.0 or larger, earthquakes 
in central and southern South America and in the Kuril Islands of magnitude 5.5 
or larger, and most other foreign earthquakes of magnitude 6.0 or larger.
   Within 24 hours, most earthquakes in the contiguous United States of 
magnitude 3.5 or larger, most earthquakes in Alaska of magnitude 4.0 or larger, 
most earthquakes in Hawaii of magnitude 4.5 or larger, most earthquakes in the 
Aleutian Islands of magnitude 5.0 or larger, and most foreign earthquakes of 
magnitude 5.5 or larger will be provided to the "quake" list.  Most earthquakes 
in the United States which are felt will be provided to the "quake" list on a 
24 hour basis even if they are smaller than a magnitude of 4.5.  Events in 
aftershock sequences which meet the 24 hour criteria, but not the immediate 
criteria will be included on the "quake" list at the discretion of the seismic 
analyst.  Note that on weekends and holidays, meeting the 24 hour criteria will 
be on a best effort basis.

                                     Note

   For your convenience, you can receive a copy of this information by E-mail 
by sending any E-mail message to:  qk_info@gldfs.cr.usgs.gov.
